Add optimization summary documents (#14999)
eclipse-openj9/openj9: doc/compiler/optimizer/LocalOptimizationsSummary.md

<!--
Copyright (c) 2022, 2022 IBM Corp. and others

This program and the accompanying materials are made available under
the terms of the Eclipse Public License 2.0 which accompanies this
distribution and is available at https://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-2.0/
or the Apache License, Version 2.0 which accompanies this distribution and
is available at https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.

This Source Code may also be made available under the following
Secondary Licenses when the conditions for such availability set
forth in the Eclipse Public License, v. 2.0 are satisfied: GNU
General Public License, version 2 with the GNU Classpath
Exception [1] and GNU General Public License, version 2 with the
OpenJDK Assembly Exception [2].

[1] https://www.gnu.org/software/classpath/license.html
[2] http://openjdk.java.net/legal/assembly-exception.html

SPDX-License-Identifier: EPL-2.0 OR Apache-2.0 OR GPL-2.0 WITH Classpath-exception-2.0 OR LicenseRef-GPL-2.0 WITH Assembly-exception
-->

# Local Optimizations

> Local optimizations operate on extended basic blocks at a time.

Reviewer: Yes, they operate on a single extended basic block at a time.

## Tree Simplification
Tree Simplification performs simple IL tree transformations like constant
folding, strength reduction, canonicalizing expressions (e.g. an `add` with a
constant child will have the constant as the second child), branch/switch
simplification etc. Float/double simplification support needs to be improved

> (call C libraries to compute the correct answer as per the Java spec).

Reviewer 2: When you say support needs to be improved, are you calling out a shortcoming of the current state? If so, it probably doesn't make sense to have it in a documentation setting, unless you can reword it to describe what the current simplification does and that it has opportunity for further refinement.

## Local Common Subexpression Elimination (CSE)/Copy Propagation
Local CSE/Copy Propagation commons identical expressions within a block and
performs removal of identical checks along with traditional commoning. Copy
Propagation is done simultaneously (The right hand side (RHS) of a store is
evaluated and the resulting register is used at each use of the stored value).
Commoning is done on syntactic equivalence.

## Local Value Propagation
Local [Value Propagation](https://github.com/eclipse/omr/blob/master/doc/compiler/optimizer/ValuePropagation.md)
performs constant, type and relational propagation within a block.
It propagates constants and types based on assignments and performs removal
of subsumed checks and compares. It also performs devirtualization
of calls, checkcast and array store check elimination. It does not do value
numbering, instead it works on the assumption that every expression has a

> unique value number (improved effectiveness if expressions having same value
> are commoned by a prior local CSE pass).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
unique value number; its effectiveness is improved if expressions having same value
are commoned by a prior local CSE pass.
```

## Local Dead Store Elimination
Local Dead Store Elimination eliminates stores to locals/fields/statics (if
there are two stores to the same memory without any intervening use in the
same block).

## Local Reordering of Expressions
Local Reordering of Expressions reduces live ranges (register pressure) by
moving evaluations around within a block.

## Array Length Simplification
In OpenJ9, array lengths are stored in number of bytes. So bound checks require

> a shift right (depending on the array stride) on the array length so that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a shift right (depending on the array stride) on the array length so that the
```

Reviewer: This optimization no longer is needed since arraylengths were changed in OpenJ9 to be stored as "number of elements" rather than "number of bytes" 20 years ago :)

Reviewer: To be 100% clear, I am saying this optimization does not exist for the above reason anymore and so it also should not be documented.

> compare can be done with array index. This optimization attempts to eliminate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
compare can be done with the array index. This optimization attempts to eliminate
```

> `shr` wherever possible (instead comparing the index left shifted based on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`shr` wherever possible (instead comparing the index left shifted based on the
```

array stride with the array length in bytes) based on when it can be proven
that it is legal to do so. Note that shifting left may cause wrap-arounds (if
the value is close to MAXINT for example) and so this optimization is done
for constant indices or indices marked as safe to left shift by value propagation.
Shifting left is better as it is already required in most cases for the address
computation for the array access.

## Compaction of Null Explicit Null Checks
Compaction of Null Explicit Null Checks minimize the cases where an explicit null

> check needs to be performed (null checks are implicit, i.e. no code for doing null
> check, instead we use hardware trap on IA32). Sometimes (say as a result of dead

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
check needs to be performed (null checks are implicit, i.e. by default on IA32, the JIT does not
emit code to perform a null check, instead we use a hardware trap). Sometimes (e.g. as a result of dead
```

Reviewer 2: Do we have implicit null checks only on IA32?

Reviewer: No, we have them on X86 (32 and 64 bitness). IA32 was just the quaint way of referring to the platform when "64-bit was new".

store removal of a store to a field) an explicit null check node may need to be
created in the IL trees (if the original dead store was responsible for checking
nullness implicitly); this pass attempts to find another expression in the same
block that can be used to perform the null check implicitly again.

## Dead Trees Elimination
Expressions that are evaluated and not used for a few instructions can actually be
evaluated exactly where required (subject to the constraint that their values should
be the same if evaluated later). This optimization attempts to simply delay evaluation
of expressions and has the effect of reducing register pressure by shortening
live ranges. It has the effect of removing some IL trees that are simply anchors

> for (already) evaluated expressions and making the trees more compact.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for (already) evaluated expressions thus making the trees more compact.
```

## Rematerialization

> Rematerialization is performed as a late pass before code generation is to be done.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Rematerialization is performed as a late pass before code generation.
```

> Basically queries the underlying code generator (IA32 etc.) for the max number of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The optimization queries the underlying code generator (IA32 etc.) for the max number of
```

registers available for assignment simultaneously, and then tries to reverse

> commoning in regions of code within a block where number of live expressions could

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
commoning in regions of code within a block where the number of live expressions could
```

cause spills. Only certain kinds of expressions are considered for rematerialization,

> e.g. address calculations (can often use more complex addressing modes on a chip),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
e.g. address calculations (as chips can support more complex addressing modes),
```
